Operating Systems.
Once you've made
an LPAR on a mainframe,
you probably want to run
an operating system on it.
Now, the mainframe runs
several different
operating systems,
and I'm going to take
you through them.
First up, there's z/OS.
Now, one thing you'll notice
about all the IBM built
operating systems is they
all start with a z slash.
When the mainframe moved
to the z architecture,
basically when it
started running 64-bit,
the operating system is got
renamed with that z as well.
So that's why you see that.
So the z/OS operating system is
the flagship IBM mainframe
operating system.
And if you trace the lineage of
that operating system way back,
it's a direct descendant
of the original OS
360 that ran back on that
first mainframe back in 1964.
It's focuses on running a wide
variety of mixed workloads
simultaneously all
while delivering
extremely high level
of quality of service.
If someone today has a mainframe,
chances are they're running z/OS,
and we're actually going
to come back to this and
talk more about z/OS later,
but I want to talk about
the other operating
systems first.
First, there z/TPF, which stands
for z Transaction
Processing Facility,
commonly used by companies
dealing with high volumes
of transactions that need to
get handled in real time.
That means credit
card processors,
airline reservation systems,
hotel and auto rental chains.
Z/TPF is extremely tied
to the world of
travel and logistics.
Z/VM is all about virtualization.
Now, we mentioned
z/VM briefly before,
the idea behind it is to provide
guest operating systems running
essentially within z/VM,
and then they get access to
all the resources that
the host z/VM is running with.
Interesting thing about z/VM is
that it is a Type 1 Hypervisor.
So instead of
running it on top of
another operating system and then
using that to host
the virtual machines,
z/VM doesn't need
another operating system
to do its thing,
it does its own thing.
That makes z/VM extremely
efficient and valuable for
testing and development.
Any operating system that runs on
the mainframe will
run within z/VM.
So if you eat a whole bunch of
systems but don't want
to use up your LPARs,
z/VM can do some pretty
interesting things.
The other operating system
IBM makes is called z/VSE.
This is a lesser used
operating system,
but it's still very important for
smaller companies who
needs something like
z/OS which can do transaction
and batch processing,
but don't need something
that big or that complex.
You also don't need
as many people to run
a z/VSE instance,
and that's appealing to smaller
companies with fewer people.
Then there's Linux,
the same Linux
that runs on phones, watches,
game consoles,
toasters, guess what,
it runs on the mainframe too,
and it runs extremely well.
If you know Linux,
then you know Linux
on the mainframe,
everything looks
pretty much the same.
If you're not
familiar with Linux,
it's an open source
operating system
that's used pretty much
all over the place.
I remember when Linux first
started showing up
on the mainframe,
people thought it was
crazy, as a crazy idea.
The idea that operating system
running on our beloved mainframe,
that was coded by a bunch of
strangers on the internet.
I mean, you want to
take this seriously,
well, that was like back in 2000,
another leap of faith and
Linux is still running
on the mainframe,
and it's hugely popular.
Lastly, KVM or Kernel-based
Virtual Machine is
an open source hypervisor.
Similar to z/VM, it's
another Type 1 Hypervisor,
meaning it doesn't require
another operating system because
it is an operating system.
People like it because
it integrates with
KVM running on other platforms.
It's used a lot for
distributed workloads,
where you need
a lot of something,
because you can scale it out
horizontally by adding
more instances,
or up vertically by adding
additional capacity on demand.
Back to the z operating system,
often just shortened to z/OS.
We're going to spend a lot of
time talking about z/OS in
this course because it is
the premiere mainframe
operating system.
It's built specifically
for the z hardware.
It offers continuous
high volume operations
with high security and stability.
Z/OS excels at supporting
a huge ecosystem of
different workloads,
supporting large numbers of
different users at the same time.
It does all this
while maintaining
the highest quality of service
for any operating system,.
By better knowing
the management functions
of an operating system,
we can better evaluate
exactly what components is
z/OS are responsible for
what we're interested in.
The z/OS operating system
is made up of components.
Some of these components
are base elements which
the operating system
comes with and
is configured with by default.
Other components are add
ons called features.
The OS doesn't necessarily
need these to run,
but you may run into them
depending on your job role.
Now, I'll just tell
you right up front,
there's a lot of components,
and some of them will just
breeze right through,
no need to define what's
essentially spelled
out in the name,
others we're going
to dive deeper into.
We're going to cover
a lot of these in
much greater detail later.
So here we go.
So to start off we've got
the Transaction Manager which
does basically what it's called,
it manages transactions
across one or more resources.
Then there's databases.
A database's job is to keep
data at not only stored,
but organized so it can be easily
found and updated later on.
Let's talk about batch jobs.
Some work doesn't need
to happen in real-time.
This could be because
the systems are
less busy later on in the day,
or it could just be because
of the nature of the data.
For example, a delivery
logistics company
loads its trucks at
night so they can hit the roads
bright early in the morning
when the drivers come in.
They might take all the data
about what deliveries
need to be made that day
and process it all at once,
so it's ready when
the drivers come in.
That's where you might
see a batch job.
Then there's
the security manager.
Make sure you can only get to
resources if you're supposed to.
Crypto services.
That allows for the data to be
protected by being encrypted,
and then used by decrypting it.
There's end user interfaces.
Obviously, you need
something to bridge that gap
between the system and
the people who are
trying to use it,
and we use TSO which stands
for Time Sharing Option.
That makes it possible
for one system to
have thousands of
connected users.
So there's this concept
on z/OS of a job,
and you're going to
hear that word a lot.
A job is like a program,
but it's a program with
a specific set of
input and output.
So imagine you've got
a payroll program.
It does the same thing.
It takes the number of hours,
somebody work their wages,
and creates a sheet
basically saying,
pay this person this much
or maybe even cuts
the cheques for them.
So the program itself doesn't
change from run to run,
but it's got a different set of
input and output each time.
You write how you want
your job to run in something
called the Job Control
Language or JCL,
and that gets submitted to
the Job Entry Subsystem, JES.
So you with me so far?
Good. When the system gets
around to running it,
it processes the data and it
puts every piece of output,
good, bad, and different
into the job output.
So you know exactly
how your job run,
and you use another component,
the System Display
and Search Facility,
thankfully shortened to SDSF
to look at all of that output.
Now, as you can imagine
when it comes time
to upgrade and manage
software on a mainframe,
it's important that everything
gets managed and tracked.
Some software depends on
other software to run,
so to install it you have to also
install what's called
a prerequisite.
Sometimes you can't
upgrade one piece of
software without also
upgrading another one.
So how do you keep all of
these dependencies straight?
Fortunately, you don't have to,
you have SMP/E, the System
Modification Program Extended.
Performance is extremely
important on the mainframe,
and it's not enough
just to say, ''Yeah,
everything's running
really fast, is good.''
You need to be able
to say exactly how
long the average transaction
is running for,
how long users are waiting for
the response, all that stuff.
On the mainframe,
you'll use RMF or
the Resource Measurement Facility
to keep tabs on how
everything is being used.
This is like the gauges
in your car,
but it also includes
data gathered over time,
so you can see
trends and patterns.
Managing storage is important,
and the mainframe uses DFSMS,
the Data Facility Storage
Management Service
to manage what data goes where.
It also handles
backups, migrations,
copies and all input
output management.
Something else that's
fairly unique to
the mainframe platform
is Workload Manager.
Just like with other managers,
it makes sure that
when you're running
multiple things at the same time
on the same platform,
they all get a fair slice
of the system resources.
But the Workload Manager
takes it a step further.
It's actually backwards from
what you might be used to.
You start by defining goals,
you say whenever this type
of transaction happens,
it needs to finish in
this amount of time.
Or maybe it's just this LPAR
over here is extremely important,
it gets priority over
all the other LPAR.
So don't let anything
they're doing
slow down anything on this LPAR,
it's the most important one.
So when you set it up correctly,
it's not a free for all,
it's a carefully controlled
and managed environment.
TCP/IP or to be complete,
SNA TCP/IP which stands for
Systems Network
Architecture Transmission
Control Protocol
Internet Protocol.
You can see why we
just say SNA TCP/IP.
This is a component of z/OS,
and it's where all of a
network communication lives.
That's all computer to
computer, computer to Internet.
Basically, anything
where a network
gets used uses SNA TCP/IP.
Now, whenever anything
happens on the mainframe,
it's extremely important that
there be a record
of it happening.
The idea of a program writing out
a diagnostic log isn't
unique to the mainframe,
but because there's so
much happening here,
it's important that there
be a standard format
and a facility to
keep it all straight.
Almost like a database
for tracking events,
that's SMF, the Systems
Management Facility.
SMF comes in handy for
diagnosing problems,
auditing transactions, and
for tracing process flows.
Last but certainly not least is
USS or Unix System Services.
You may not know this,
but you can actually run
Unix programs within
the z/OS environment.
Z/OS has USS which is
a POSIX compliant environment,
so you can run scripts,
utilities, and tools.
It's not an operating
system within
z/OS like a VM, it's
an environment.
So that means a lot of
the utilities are
shared between them,
and you can even fire off
z/OS jobs from
within a Unix shell.
Those are the z/OS components.
Took a little while, but I
think it was time well spent.